Add feature page for Copy Host Networking (#2037)
oVirt/ovirt-site: source/develop/release-management/features/network/copy-host-networking.html.md

The Copy Host Networking feature makes adding new hosts easier because you can configure the network on a single host
and then copy that configuration to any new host that has the same layout of network interfaces.

You can use this feature to perform initial deployments and to update running environments. It is available as a button
in the Administration Portal UI, and as a REST API method.

### Owner

- Feature Owner: Ales Musil (amusil)
- E-mail: <amusil@redhat.com>

### Example flow

After creating a cluster, you add several hosts (`Host0, Host1, Host2`). 
You configure the network settings for `Host0`. The two other hosts have the same network 
interface layout as `Host0`, so you copy the network configuration from `Host0` to `Host1` and `Host2`.

In the Admin Portal, you go to the `Host1` and `Host2` network interfaces and click
the `Copy Host Networking` button. In the popup window that appears,
you select the host, `Host0`, from which to copy the configuration.

Alternatively, with the REST API, you can use the `copynetworks` method for `Host1` and `Host2`. 
This method takes a single parameter, the host ID from which to copy the configuration (`Host0`). 

> 

Reviewer: Can you please provide an example of how the use the REST API and ask Ondra to review this?

Author: I think we can add it once I know more implementation details

Reviewer: Which information do you miss?

### Limitations

* You can copy host configurations only within the same cluster. 

* You cannot copy network configurations that contain static IP addresses: 
This sets the boot protocol in the resulting network to `none`.

* Copying a configuration to a host with the same interface names but different physical network connections will
produce a bad configuration. Only copy configurations to hosts that have the same interface names and physical 
network connections. 

* The destination host has to have an equal or greater number of interfaces as the original host. Otherwise,
the feature cannot determine what to do.

* The `ovirtmgmt` network stays on the original interface which is excluded from the operation. 

### Implementation

> A new command `CopyNetworks` is added to the engine. That has destination and source host as parameters.

Reviewer 2: The engine has a new method, `CopyNetworks`, that copies the network configuration of the source host (`SourceHost`) and uses it to overwrite the network configuration of the destination host (`DestinationHost`).

This method takes two parameters, the `SourceHost` ID and the `DestinationHost` ID. 
 
Given the parameters, the method validates that the following items are correct:
  * Both hosts are in the same cluster. 
  * The destination host has an equal or higher number of interfaces than the source host. 

(**NOTE:** These interface names and physical connections to the datacenter must be identical. Otherwise, this sorting process produces a bad network configuration on the destination host.)

The method prepares a set of network attachment definitions for the `DestinationHost` by doing the following:
 
* Lists the interfaces on the `SourceHost` that don't have bonds.
* Lists all of the interfaces on the  `DestinationHost`. 
* Sorts both lists by name.
* Excludes interface/bonds connected to the `ovirtmgmt` network.
 * Pairs all of the bond slaves from the `SourceHost` with their corresponding partners on the `DestinationHost`. 
*  Creates bond definitions in a configuration for the `DestinationHost`.	 
* Retrieves a list of all interfaces with bonds from `SourceHost`.
* Excludes bond slaves from both lists.
* Shortens the `DestinationHost` list to match the same length as `SourceHost` list. 	 
* Copies the network attachments for all interfaces in `SourceHost` list.
* Walks through the new network attachments list and updates any static IP address configurations.
* Sends `HostSetupNetworks` with new attachments and bonds for `DestinationHost` to complete everything in a single transaction. 
* If there is an error, it reverts the configuration changes. 	 
 
  
The Admin Portal has a new button called `Copy Host Networking`. Clicking the button opens a dialog window. There, you can select the source host from which to copy the configuration.

Author: Done, thanks

---
title: Copy Host Networking
category: feature
authors: Ales Musil
feature_name: Copy Host Networking
feature_modules: copy-host-networking
feature_status: In Development
---

# Copy Host Networking

## Summary

> Ordinarily, adding hosts in oVirt in the UI is tedious because you, as an administrator, have to set up the host 

Author: The text was corrected by documentation team, but thank you for the suggestions

network on each new host.

> The Copy Host Networking feature makes adding new hosts easier because you can configure the network on a single host

Author: Documentation team

and then copy that configuration to any new host that has the same layout of network interfaces.

> You can use this feature to perform initial deployments and to update running environments. It is available as a button

Author: We can update network of any host

> You can use this feature to perform initial deployments and to update running environments. It is available as a button

Reviewer 3: Yes, we have multiHost setup networks for that) which is an old feature.

in the Administration Portal UI, and as a REST API method.

### Owner

- Feature Owner: Ales Musil (amusil)
- E-mail: <amusil@redhat.com>

### Example flow

After creating a cluster, you add several hosts (`Host0, Host1, Host2`). 
You configure the network settings for `Host0`. The two other hosts have the same network 
interface layout as `Host0`, so you copy the network configuration from `Host0` to `Host1` and `Host2`.

In the Admin Portal, you go to the `Host1` and `Host2` network interfaces and click
the `Copy Host Networking` button. In the popup window that appears,
you select the host, `Host0`, from which to copy the configuration.

> Alternatively, with the REST API, you can use the `copynetworks` method for `Host1` and `Host2`. 

Reviewer 4: Could you give an example of the REST request.
I always find it annoying to have to look in the docs to get the format of the request correct.

Author: I'll update the document once I have the patch to the REST merged and I know for sure the final look of the call

This method takes a single parameter, the host ID from which to copy the configuration (`Host0`). 

> 

Reviewer 2: The REST API examples should conform somewhat to the examples in our [REST API documentation](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_virtualization/4.3/html-single/rest_api_guide/index#services-host). This [RHV REST API Quick Reference](https://mojo.redhat.com/docs/DOC-1190143) might also be useful. If you make a first pass at writing them, I'll be happy to contribute revisions.

> 

Author: Thanks, I have added the text with your suggested procedures and I'll keep the page updated with development progress.

### Limitations

* You can copy host configurations only within the same cluster. 

* You cannot copy network configurations that contain static IP addresses: 
This sets the boot protocol in the resulting network to `none`.

* Copying a configuration to a host with the same interface names but different physical network connections will
produce a bad configuration. Only copy configurations to hosts that have the same interface names and physical 
network connections. 

* The destination host has to have an equal or greater number of interfaces as the original host. Otherwise,

> the feature cannot determine what to do.

Reviewer 4: "cannot determine"
What will be the outcome? Will it fail? Will it only do partial configuration?

Author: Done

> * The `ovirtmgmt` network stays on the original interface which is excluded from the operation. 

Reviewer 4: Could you elaborate?
What if `ovirtmgmt` is on different nics on source and target?

Author: This does not matter because both source and destination management network is excluded

Reviewer 3: Good)

* Lists the interfaces on the SourceHost that don't have bonds.
* Lists all of the interfaces on the DestinationHost.
* Sorts both lists by name.
* Excludes interface/bonds connected to the ovirtmgmt network.
* Pairs all of the bond slaves from the SourceHost with their corresponding partners on the DestinationHost.
* Creates bond definitions in a configuration for the DestinationHost.
* Retrieves a list of all interfaces with bonds from SourceHost.
* Excludes bond slaves from both lists.
* Shortens the DestinationHost list to match the same length as SourceHost list.
* Copies the network attachments for all interfaces in SourceHost list.
* Walks through the new network attachments list and updates any static IP address configurations.
* Sends HostSetupNetworks with new attachments and bonds for DestinationHost to complete everything in a single
 transaction.
* If there is an error, it reverts the configuration changes.

The Admin Portal has a new button called Copy Host Networking. Clicking the button opens a dialog window. There, 
you can select the source host from which to copy the configuration.

### Future work

> To improve usability the biggest limitation is network mapping of interfaces with different name. 

Reviewer 4: Not very clear, maybe just: 
The biggest limitation is network mapping of interfaces with different name.

Author: Done

This can be overcome by enabling custom mapping which would let the administrator to map certain
or all interfaces to their corresponding equivalents on the destination host. This way the limitation
of interface count on destination host could be removed assuming that the administrator would provide
specific mapping for this setups. This functionality could be enabled via UI and REST API.

> 

Reviewer 4: We could label nic configurations, and apply them to nics on new hosts by just labelling them.
This would even allow to copy configuration from two different hosts onto one.
For example:

HOST_SRC0                 HOST_SRC1                 HOST DEST
nic0 (label0)  ------------------------------------------->   nic0 (label0)  
nic 1 (label1) ------------------------------------------->   nic 1 (label1)
nic3                               nic0 (label2)   ----------->    nic2 (label2) 
                                      nic1  (label3)  ---------->    nic3 (label3)
                                                                                nic4

Author: Label is possible solution but I am afraid that would create mess with labels.

Reviewer 3: I agree with Ales here..prefer not to

---
title: Copy Host Networking
category: feature
authors: Ales Musil
feature_name: Copy Host Networking
feature_modules: copy-host-networking
feature_status: In Development
---

# Copy Host Networking

## Summary

> As it turned out setting up multiple hosts at once can be rather tedious via

Reviewer 5: It is not just "at once". I'd day

Adding multiple hosts to oVirt via the UI can be rather tedious.

Author: Done

> Adding multiple hosts to oVirt via the UI can be rather tedious. The slow point is that the administrator has to go

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, adding hosts to oVirt in the UI was tedious because you, as an administrator, had to set up the host network on each new host.
 
Now, this process is more straightforward because you can set up the network on a single host and copy its network configuration to new hosts. This capability is called Copy Host Networking.
```

> Adding multiple hosts to oVirt via the UI can be rather tedious. The slow point is that the administrator has to go

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, adding hosts to oVirt in the UI was tedious because you, as an administrator, had to set up the host network on each new host.
 
Now, this process is more straightforward because you can set up the network on a single host and copy its network configuration to new hosts. This capability is called Copy Host Networking.
```

> Adding multiple hosts to oVirt via the UI can be rather tedious. The slow point is that the administrator has to go

Reviewer 2: Previously, adding hosts to oVirt in the UI was tedious because you, as an administrator, had to set up the host network on each new host.
 
Now, this process is more straightforward because you can set up the network on a single host and copy its network configuration to new hosts. This capability is called Copy Host Networking.

Reviewer 5: "Now" feels a bit awkward to me. May we say "With this feature implemented" instead?

Author: Done

through every new host and do Setup Host Network manually. By utilizing Copy Host Networking, the administrator has
to set only single host, for the rest the administrator can just specify the host to take the network configuration from. 

### Owner

- Feature Owner: Ales Musil (amusil)
- E-mail: <amusil@redhat.com>

> ### Benefit to oVirt

Reviewer 2: You can delete this section. It repeats the proposed introduction.

Author: Done

### Benefit to oVirt

> The Copy Host Network helps the administrator with Day 1 deployment automation

Reviewer 5: English: The Copy Host Network *command* helps

Reviewer 5: I don't know if everyone knows what "Day 1" means. I'd use quotes to make clearer that this is an idiom.

Author: Done

### Example flow

> After creation of new Cluster, the administrator adds several hosts (`Host0, Host1, Host2`). 

Author: Done

> `Host0` networking has to be configured manually either by UI or through REST API.

Author: Done

> Other hosts, as long as they have same layout of network interfaces, can copy

Author: Done

> their settings from the host that has been already configured. 

Author: Done

> The copy can be done via UI. Going to hosts network interfaces and by clicking

Author: Done

> the `Copy Host Networking` button. In the popup window that will appear 

Author: Done

> the administrator can select from which host (`Host0`) should the configuration be copied.

Author: Done

> Via REST API every host has method called `copynetworks` which needs a single

Author: Done

> parameter, id of the host (`Host0`) that the configuration should be copied from. 

Author: I'll add it once we have the REST API part implemented

> ### Limitation

Author: Done

### Limitation

* The host configuration can be copied only within the same cluster. 

> 

Reviewer: Sounds fair and we should keep it like this, but do you think the same datacenter would work, too?

Author: I am afraid of the differences between cluster for required networks.

> * The host configuration can be copied only within the same cluster. 

Author: Done

> * Configuration of static IP address for any of the networks cannot be copied. The resulting network has 

Author: Done

> boot protocol set as none. 

Author: Done

* Configuration of static IP address for any of the networks cannot be copied. The static IP

> networks have their IP incremented by one to stay in range of the mask. 

Reviewer 3: Just an idea:
Can we add an option may be to set a new static IP address during the copy network from host. nice to have.

Author: I will add this to the future work.

Reviewer: Another idea: Can we have a parameter which switches between the proposed incrementing IPs to no copy static IP config?

Reviewer 5: I don't see a use case for copying static IP from one host to another - it is an accident waiting to happen.
We have two options:
- copy only L2
- assign (what ovirt engine thing is) a free IP address in the subnet provided by the original host

the second option is really cool, but it has problems if some of the subnet is not managed by oVirt. I'd keep it to a later phase of this feature.

> * Host with same interface names but different physical network connections will result in bad configuration. 

Author: Done

> * Host with same interface names but different physical network connections will result in bad configuration. 

Reviewer 3: what bad configuration is means? does it just fail to copy networks?
what happen for add new host scenario? does the add host should fail?

Author: Everything will be copied but the logical structure of the network will be messed up. But there is nothing from our side we can do about this. It is up to the administrator that manages the deployment.

Reviewer 3: What will happen during add host? the host will be added or the admin will need to fix his host or just not choose to copy host networks?

Author: The operation should pass, it is not blocker in any way. It is there just to inform the administrator that it might happen.

> * Destination host has to have as many interfaces as host that we are copying from the or more. In case

Author: Done

> * Destination host has to have same amount or more interfaces than host that we are copying from. In case

Reviewer 5: English:  same amount or more interfaces than -> as many interfaces as the .... or more.

Author: Done

> of opposite, we cannot determine if we should create bond with missing interface or skip the bond creation

Author: Done

> and use it only for simple network attachment.

Author: Done

of opposite, we cannot determine if we should create bond with missing interface or skip the bond creation

> and use it only for simple network attachment.

Reviewer 3: Just to make it clear for my self:
If host a has a bond interface with network attached and host b doesn't have bond, but it has same interfaces and same amount, do we will try to create this bond with the network attachment for host b?

Author: Yes we will try to create bonds also.

Reviewer 3: nice

> 

Reviewer: I wonder if the management network has to be on the same interface.

Reviewer 3: I think it's better that management network will be on the same NIC, it may cause issues if not

Author: You are right we should not move management network. Corner case might be that the original interface is part of the bond.

> 

Reviewer: What should happen if the destination host has already non-management network configured?

Author: As I see it we should replace the configuration with copied one.

Reviewer: If you think that this would mean that already configured networks on the destination host should be removed, please write this in the text. Just to avoid misunderstandings about the desired behavior.

Author: Done

the destination to has the same number of interfaces or more. Command retrieves interface 
list from both hosts and order it by name. This ordering might result in wrong network configuration if
interface names on both hosts are identical but physical connection in data center is different.
The command then proceeds to preparation of network attachment definitions. Let's refer to host that is
being to copied as `SourceHost` and host the will receive the new configuration as `DestinationHost`.

* Retrieve list of all interfaces without bonds from `SourceHost` and all interfaces from `DestinationHost`. Ordering
them by their name. 

* All bond slaves from `SourceHost` are paired with their corresponding partners. New bonds definitions are 
created accordingly in configuration that will be passed to `DestinationHost`.

* Retrieve list of all interfaces with bonds from `SourceHost`. Exclude bond slaves from both lists and shorten 
the `DestinationHost` list to match the same length as `SourceHost` list. 

* Copy network attachments for all interfaces in `SourceHost` list. 

* Walk through the new network attachments list and update any static IP address configuration. IP address

> is incremented by one with address check (same subnet and address is not broadcast or network). 

Reviewer 5: please split L3 management for a follow up, I think it is more complex than this: the same subnet may have VMs or unrelated bare-metal hosts which ovirt-engine is unfamiliar with. We must not cause a collision, I'd rather have the IP address empty, or enable DHCP.

Author: Empty

* Send `HostSetupNetworks` with new attachments and bonds for `DestinationHost`. This will ensure that everything
is done in single transaction and configuration will be reverted on any possible error. 

New button and dialog is added to Webadmin UI. Button is called `Copy Host Networking` and upon click opens

> new dialog window that let administrator select another host from the same cluster to copy the configuration 

Reviewer: Can this be implemented as UI plugin?

Author: It probably can. Because we will have REST API endpoint anyway.

Reviewer: Maybe we can address this in a second PR: Can we discuss the new UI with Laura?

from. 

REST API Host service received new method called `copynetworks` which takes single parameter `copy_from` 
that is id of the host what we want to copy configuration from. 

### Future work

To improve usability the biggest limitation is network mapping of interfaces with different name. 
This can be overcome by enabling custom mapping which would let the administrator to map certain
or all interfaces to their corresponding equivalents on the destination host. This way the limitation
of interface count on destination host could be removed assuming that the administrator would provide
specific mapping for this setups. This functionality could be enabled via UI and REST API.

> Static IP configuration could be improved by letting the administrator to set the increment value

Reviewer 3: Like this idea :)

or provide mapping some or all of the static addresses. 

## Testing

> * Copy network for hosts in different cluster should fail

Reviewer 3: ack

> * Copy network for destination host with less interfaces than source should fail

Reviewer 3: ack

> * Copy network for destination and source with equal interface count should pass

Reviewer 3: ack

> * Copy network for destination with more interfaces than source should pass, interfaces that are

Reviewer 3: ack

excessive should be left without any configuration change

* Configuration that should be tested for successful run, all settings should be copied except the

> static IP configuration which should be incremented: 

Reviewer 3: ack
